AI #1803: Contract Commitment dataset extension (#1924)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/datasets/contract_commitment/columns/contractcommitmentmodel.md

# Contract Commitment Model

Contract Commitment Model represents the operational behavior and consumption flexibility of a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment). This field distinguishes between rigid, "use-it-or-lose-it" obligations (typically hourly) and flexible, aggregate-based agreements that accommodate variable usage patterns.

> Contract Commitment Model has two possible values: **Continuous** and **Discontinuous**. Continuous models (e.g, reserved instances, savings plans) represent a flat, constant "floor" of commitment where any dip in usage results in immediate, unrecoverable waste. Discontinuous models (e.g., enterprise agreements, SaaS minimum spend agreements) represent a broader, more flexible bucket where the commitment is "spikier": the usage can fluctuate wildly, but as long as the aggregate hits the target (or the true-up handles the variance), the commitment is satisfied.  In either case, the interval of the commitment is represented by the [Contract Commitment Interval](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentinterval).

Reviewer: Change Contract Commitment Interval to Contract Commitment Fulfillment Interval

## Requirements

ContractCommitmentModel adheres to the following requirements:

* ContractCommitmentModel MUST be of type String.
* ContractCommitmentModel MUST NOT be null.
* ContractCommitmentModel MUST be one of the allowed values.

## Column ID

ContractCommitmentModel

## Display Name

Contract Commitment Model

## Description

Represents the operational behavior and consumption flexibility of a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment).

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Dataset         | [Contract Commitment](#datasets.contractcommitment)  |
| Column type     | Dimension      |
| Feature level   | Mandatory      |
| Allows nulls    | False          |
| Data type       | String         |
| Value format    | Allowed values |

Allowed values:

| Value         | Description                                                                                                                                                     |
| ------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Continuous    | A rigid, constant commitment (e.g., RIs, Savings Plans). Coverage is applied at a fixed rate per [Contract Commitment Interval](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentinterval) (usually hourly).                                    |

Reviewer: Change Contract Commitment Interval to Contract Commitment Fulfillment Interval

> | Discontinuous | A flexible, aggregate commitment (e.g., Enterprise Agreements, SaaS Minimum Spend). Coverage is measured over a broad window or against a total dollar volume. |

Reviewer 2: Isn't the coverage measured over the Contract Commitment Duration?

Author: Potentially yes; potentially no.  Here are some (AI-generated) examples.

Lmk if you still have concerns.  If not, please resolve.

----

### Real-World Example: Mismatched Fulfillment Interval and Duration

The most prominent "real-life" example of this mismatch—where the **Fulfillment Interval** is shorter than the **Duration**—is the **AWS Enterprise Discount Program (EDP)**, also known as the **Strategic Collaboration Agreement (SCA)**.

#### The Scenario: AWS EDP
When a large enterprise signs a 3-year AWS EDP, they often commit to a specific spend amount **per year**, rather than one lump sum for the whole term.

* **The Commitment:** "I commit to spending $10M in Year 1, $12M in Year 2, and $15M in Year 3."
* **The Duration:** **3 Years**. (The contract is active from Day 1 to the end of Year 3).
* **The Fulfillment Interval:** **Annual**.

#### Why the distinction is critical:
If this were a "Total Term" fulfillment interval, a customer who spent $0 in Year 1 and $37M in Year 3 would be "compliant." However, because AWS EDPs are typically enforced with **Annual** intervals:

1.  **Year 1 Math:** If the customer only spends $8M, they have a **$2M shortfall**. They are usually required to "True-up" (pay the difference) at the end of that 12-month window.
2.  **The "Reset":** On the first day of Year 2, the clock resets. The $2M they "bought" via True-up in Year 1 does not give them a head start on Year 2.

#### Other Examples:
* **Google Cloud (Commitment Bundles):** Similar to AWS, many GCP multi-year deals are structured as "Annual Milestones." If you miss the milestone in Year 1, you can't "make it up" in Year 2 without specific (and rare) carry-over provisions.
* **SaaS (Salesforce/ServiceNow):** You might sign a 3-year deal for 1,000 seats. If you only use 800 seats in Year 1, you don't get 1,200 seats in Year 2. The **Fulfillment Interval** is effectively **Monthly** or **Annual**, while the **Duration** is **3 Years**.

Author: Resolving, given Rob's approval of the PR.

> | Discontinuous | A flexible, aggregate commitment (e.g., Enterprise Agreements, SaaS Minimum Spend). Coverage is measured over a broad window or against a total dollar volume. |

Reviewer 3: Based on the terms Continuous and Rigid, I assume that the following conditions must all be met for a Contract Commitment to be classified as Continuous. And if any of these conditions are not satisfied, the commitment would be considered Discontinuous.

Assumed MUST-HAVE characteristics of a Continuous model

- Total Contract Commitment Cost or Quantity is evenly distributed across all fulfillment intervals.
- Commitment is evaluated per Contract Commitment Fulfillment Interval (e.g., hourly), with unused benefits either not carried over to subsequent intervals or reconciled at the end of the term through a true-up.
- Discount rate (benefit %) is constant across intervals (either locked-in discount or locked-in pricing).

Questions:
- Are all of these mandatory for a commitment to be classified as Continuous, or are some just typical?
- Are there any other characteristics we should include?
- Should we more explicitly articulate the must-have characteristics of the Continuous model in the definition to avoid ambiguity?

Author: I assume that all of those are characteristics of a Continuous model, but I'm not certain whether this could be the case for every possible Continuous model in the future.  I would prefer to hedge by using terms like "typical" and providing examples.

I would vote not to be more explicit, but I invite your suggestion for consideration.

Author: Met with @ijurica, and we aligned on this proposal.  She will review and confirm it works for her.

```suggestion
| Continuous    | A flat, constant "floor" of commitment (e.g., RIs, Savings Plans). Coverage is applied at a fixed rate per [Contract Commitment Fulfillment Interval](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentfulfillmentinterval) (usually hourly), and benefits are not carried over to subsequent intervals.                                    |
| Discontinuous | A flexible, aggregate commitment (e.g., Enterprise Agreements, SaaS Minimum Spend). Coverage is measured over a broad window or against a total monetary value. |
```

Reviewer 3: That's what I was looking for. Thanks!
